This is an interview with Jane Gregory by Molly
Aldrich on November 17, 1990 at her home
concerning the Civil Rights Movement in the 60s.
Could you please state your name for us? Jane
Gregory. Could you tell us when you were born? In
1951 in Houston, Texas. And could you give us a
little bit of background on your education?
Well, being born in Houston in 1951 in a white
family meant you lived on the southeast side of
town over off Scott Street and in the University of
Houston area. But in the 60s, the great white
flight took off for southwest Houston. I remember
when the first black family bought a home on our
block. It was like the Purcell sons went up
overnight. And I ended up in Bel Air High School.
Well, I went to junior high and elementary school
on the southwest side too, but I graduated from Bel
Air High School in 1969 and then started the
University of Texas in the fall of 69.
Why did you become involved in the Civil Rights
Movement?
I guess Early on, I had a very clear idea of the fact
that I lived in a prejudiced family. Maybe not
prejudiced by Southern standards, but somehow
prejudiced by my own standards. We had what my
mother referred to as a negra maid. My mother
thought that was very liberal of her to use that
particular word. But she didn't eat lunch with us
at our table. And I remember questioning my mom
about that even really early. But I guess the thing
that triggered the civil rights movement big time
for me was the election year of 1968, when George
Wallace and Curtis LeMay were running on the
American Party ticket. And they were, as most
people of my generation will remember, very
outspoken for the rights and very down on any type
of integration. And to make matters worse, my
father had fought with Curtis LeMay during World
War II and strongly supported the Wallace LeMay
ticket. So while he was nailing up campaign signs
and posting them in our front yard, I went to the
other extreme. I suppose a way of not only
supporting a cause I believed in, but also
rebelling against those authoritarian ties that
everybody needs to rebel against.
What influenced your decision to join the
Students for a Democratic Society?
Well, there were several campus groups at the
time.
I was involved at first with just general peace
marches. Now, the peace marches were primarily
against the Vietnam War. Civil rights was sort of
just a splinter of it. The big thing was the Vietnam
War because it affected so many people my age. And
it did not seem that the passive resistance was
working at all. and that a more direct and perhaps
more violent tactic was needed. And
I listened to a lot of the Chicago 7 trials, and I had
involvements with people who were in California
and Oregon and on the West Coast and persuaded me
that the SDS would be the only way we could affect
the change. How many were in the UT chapter and what
years were you involved in it? I was only in it for
one year in 1969. Well, 1969, 70. By 70,
I had become so disillusioned. with the United
States in general that I left the country.
But in the UT chapter, at the time, now I don't know
how many card-carrying SDS members there were,
but I know of at least 200 active, active people
that I could call at any time with any crazy idea or
plot or any type of... anarchist idea that would
cause or disrupt normal campus activities to a
point that we could make our point.
What was your view on American involvement in
Vietnam? I was totally opposed. And
I had two cousins fighting in that particular war,
and my family was extremely
agitated with me for being involved. The civil
rights movement had been bad enough, but to march
against the government of the United States and to
go on to the Capitol grounds, there was a big
protest march that we were involved in where the
students attempted to take over the state
Capitol. And that was my first experience with
tear gas, a very pleasant one. And
Lyndon Johnson, being from Texas, I guess even
insulted them more that I would be against the war.
But total opposition to the war is the only way I can
express it. I felt it was morally wrong, and I felt
that people were dying over there for no just
reason. I didn't feel like the United States had
any business in Vietnam. Friends in SDS and other
groups had said that Cambodia was next on the list,
and they were sure right about that. To
answer your question, I was totally opposed.
How many other organizations were you involved
with during the 60s movement?
When you belong to SDS, first of all, you didn't go
around announcing particularly that you were in
SDS because it could get you in a whole lot of
trouble. So there was a different group that was
much more peaceful in nature. It was a University
of Texas group. I'm trying to remember the name.
Goodness gracious.
Well, Students Against the Vietnam War or
Students Opposed to the Vietnam War. I can't
remember the initial or the acronym for it, but I
was involved in that. But most of the other groups
that I became involved in, I did it just to shield my
membership in SDS because I didn't... If I was
associated with more peaceful groups and active
in a few of the more peaceful demonstrations, I
never missed a demonstration. And at the time,
college professors were most understanding. I'd
say the majority of the faculty in all of the
classes I took, my professors were against the
Vietnam War. I spent very little time in class,
actually, the first semester at the University of
Texas.
But you could get credit if you went to the peace
marches and marched with your professors, and I
was there. It was a lot more fun than studying
anthropology.
What types of demonstrations were you involved
in, and could you explain the different ones?
Well, the one I mentioned earlier, the largest
demonstration I suppose I was ever involved in was
the the march onto the state capitol grounds. And
there were thousands of students there,
literally thousands. And I'm not sure at what
point we marched from the campus to the capitol
building. And there were police the whole way
along, but they didn't seem, they were there and
they were policing the crowds. but they did not
seem really concerned. We joked around with them a
lot. We kidded with them a lot, like, come on, join
us, and they'd give you the peace sign, and you'd
flash it back, and we'd pass construction workers
and people on the way and just kid around. There was
none of the angriness that you sometimes see
where, construction workers would get in
confrontations with students or scream about
communists or anything like that. It was such a
mild day. I remember that most about it. And there
were a lot of speeches on the Capitol grounds by
various speakers. And I'm not sure exactly at what
point it was decided that or who was speaking that
encouraged us to literally try to take over the
Capitol building. But that appealed to a great
number of people I was particularly standing
there with, including my psychology professor.
And so we literally went into the rotunda of the
State Capitol building in an attempt to take over
the State Capitol building. Now, being young and
not real clear on the idea, I'm not sure what we
thought that would accomplish in retrospect. I do
know that that's when the day turned ugly because
that's when the police were ordered in and tear gas
was thrown in and a number of us were arrested. I was
arrested and was taken down to the Austin jail
where we spent the night away singing peace songs,
you know, we shall overcome. All we were saying is
give peace a chance. Having a great old time. My
parents, however, did not look at this as a good
time when they arrived in Austin to get me out of
jail. Other demonstrations, I went to Atlanta for
one demonstration,
and I went to New Orleans for another
demonstration. The one in Atlanta was a civil
rights, and the one in New Orleans was a... meeting
of planning committees for SDS and what we could do
on college campuses, and it was
not a publicized meeting. But while there, we were
on the LSU campus, and we did meet with various
other people. There was another meeting out in
Berkeley that year, but I was not able to go to
California.
California, the West Coast was a hotbed for SDS
activity, and I did communicate by letter with
various people involved in that. But I did not make
the Berkeley meeting that year, which proved to be
the one I should have made as far as
a lot of things going on and happening.
What makes your generation different from your
parents' generation?
I guess my generation was different because we not
only questioned the government. We didn't just
sit back on the porch and complain about taxes. We
took to the streets and let the government know
that we were really pissed off. That this just
wasn't going to fly. That they no longer had the...
Authority, in our estimation, are the right to
determine who would die and who would live a good
life. A lot's been made of the generation gap, and
it wasn't a gap. It was the Grand Canyon. I watched
my friends and myself, those years with our
families, were horrible. I don't remember a
single dinner when I would go home or at the
holidays that wasn't disrupted by a huge family
fight and ended with me storming out or my mother in
tears or my father cursing and ranting and raving.
I mean, everything from the length of my brother's
hair, you know, on that kind of trivial manner to
the politics that that children that he felt he had
raised and given every opportunity, and we were
turning on them. We were throwing out all their
ideals. God was dead. No respect for schools or
teachers, certainly no respect for parents, no
respect for the American flag or the American way.
He felt, my father, my mother, that we were just
doomed for communism. Women didn't wear bras.
Guys let their hair grow down their backs. People
were on drugs. This is how my parents saw it. They
saw it on a very superficial level. And the more
they carried on, the more we did, too. And the
louder my father got, the more Archie Bunkerish, I
suppose, he became. the more he drove me into
knowing I didn't want to be like him, nothing like
him. I didn't want to be like my mother. I didn't
want to be under a husband's thumb.
I wouldn't do that. And as a result, I became a very
judgmental person of my parents' generation,
just as judgmental of them as they were of me
because I was so determined not to end up like them.
My
generation
protested en masse. We got together on that. We
were convinced that you couldn't just accept your
government and think they were always right. My
father, when he went into World War II, He went in
because those goddamn Japanese snuck over there
and did that to us. He went over there. He honestly
believed he was fighting for the protection of
democracy and to guarantee his children an
American way of life, whereas it was a sham. It was
just to make the rich even richer. And the thought
that he just fell for that and couldn't see through
what the government was doing just amazed me. I
think my generation was better educated, more
analytical.
But my parents were probably more innocent and
more happy, that generation. Even though they'd
been through a depression and a world war, they
thought they had suffered and now that they were
living a good life and they couldn't understand
why we just didn't and sit back and enjoy the fruits
of their labor. And OK, the Vietnam War was here,
and the young men had to go fight. But that was
nothing that their fathers hadn't been willing to
do. And I had another cousin, two cousins in the
Vietnam War, and one cousin who went to Canada.
That cousin was totally ostracized from the
family. It was his name. His own mother struck his
name out of the family Bible.
Didn't forgive him.
until amnesty was granted years later. And once
the country forgave him, I guess she thought she
could too.
We were motivated by something that wasn't
motivating our parents, I suppose. The American
way didn't seem like such a big motivator to us. We
were looking for a different way.
What were some of the ways your organizations went
about getting their message across or mobilizing
support? Well, the demonstrations were big. And
you would put signs up all over campus announcing
big demonstrations and peace marches. And you'd
bring in speakers. Jerry Rubin, we brought in
Lawrence Ferlinghetti, a poet at the time out in
California. He still is a poet. To read
controversial poems at the time, any poem that had
the word fuck in it was just considered wonderful,
even if its poetic merits were nil. But it was such a
controversial time. The word has lost some of its
impact, but at the time to have a an adult stand up in
a public place and read a poem with that kind of word
in it, especially if it was referred to as the
fucking Vietnam War, then, you know, you could be
assured that that speaker would get a rousing
ovation and cheers.
SDS would use these peace marches or
demonstrations a lot of times because so many
people would be off campus to do, when I look back on
it, it's probably more practical jokes than
anything. Although it was disruptive at the time,
they would cut phone wires in the administration
building. They would go around and jam locks to
major doors so that people couldn't get in to their
offices or buildings. That seemed to be one of
their favorites. Flag burnings were another way
that you could always draw a big crowd along with
draft burning And everybody would just come, and
the guys would have their draft cards, and it'd
just take a couple of them to start throwing them in
there. And the next thing you know, you'd have a
pretty good fire.
I guess another way support was gathered was
through drugs. And marijuana was a big drug at the
time, along with LSD, but... He knew if somebody
had pot and joints started passing around, he knew
that
more people would probably end up burning their
draft cards that night than might have otherwise.
So it was always good to keep drugs and take drugs to
these marches. Everybody smoked marijuana, and
by everybody I mean everybody I knew or had
anything in common with, my professors, my
friends, people that I'd known to be perfectly
quote unquote straight people.
Music was another way of getting support. Janis
Joplin was big at the time. The Beatles started
getting really big into the peace movement. You'd
blare these records on huge speakers across the
campus, start passing around a joint or two, and
the next thing you knew, you were willing to march
again wherever people wanted to go. So you
think.
At the flag burnings, this is when hostility
sometimes would come out between the community
and the campus because a lot of people have very
strong feelings about the flag. When the flag
would be burned, sometimes there would be
somebody who would rush in and try to yank it out of a
fire or start screaming at people who were doing it
and the name calling would begin and everything.
But these people were really few, very few and hard
between. And I don't suppose any discussion at
this time of different things that people did at
this time would be complete without at least
mentioning sex. And I guess sex was another way we
really had of motivating people because the free
love, that Haight-Ashbury summer and everything
became a real focal point. And it was neat to be in
the group I was in because you could have You could
have many different sexual partners and enjoy
sex, and certainly the stigmatism was off it. It
wasn't like only bad girls did that or only tramps
did that. I mean, it was part of the movement. It was
free love, and it was considered cool, and you
could do that and not have a name on you. And at the
time, I really believed that having sex with
someone was nothing more than just an extension of
friendship and a sharing of common goals and
bonds. And this was a person, certainly I didn't
intend to marry, but that we shared that
particular experience and mix in the drugs and the
sex. And you attracted a lot of young men to your
movement. I mean, think about it. You're 18, 19
years old. You're away from home for the first
time. The girls are all into this peace stuff and
with it comes drugs and sex. Seemed pretty good.
Kent State was a big mobilizing factor when the
National Guard was called in and students were
actually killed on a college campus by the
National Guardsmen. And that became a real focal
point of how bad things had gotten in the country
when now we had guardsmen firing on college
students who were actually exercising their
right to express their opinions, freedom of
speech. It tore the country apart, Kent State. It
brought everything to a head here. It's one thing
to send your son off to the Vietnam War where you
know the likelihood that he'll be killed is great,
but to send your sons and daughters to school and
have the National Guard, who, let's face it, your
tax dollars were going to support, fire upon your
children. That brought a lot of parental support
to the side of the peace
movement. How do you feel the music affected your
generation?
Oh. Well, I don't feel as strongly as Plato did
that. Music must be controlled, or as Aristotle
did, that music must be censored. But I do think it
had a profound effect. The music seemed perfectly
geared to what we were fighting about and what we
were trying to push, the civil rights ideas. He
ain't heavy. He's my brother. The idea of free
love. and drugs and goodness. It just went hand in
hand with the movement of the time. Woodstock in
the summer of 1969, the summer after I graduated
from high school, my parents refused to let me go,
would not let us go. Threatened me with everything
in the world if I went, so of course I went. My best
friend Colleen and I and one other girl told our
parents, asked our parents, we told them,
whatever, we were going to the beach. And that
night, we called from Atlanta just to say we were
going. And I'll never forget, my father said, I
said, he said, why aren't you home? And I said, I'm
not coming home. I'm in Atlanta. We're going to
Woodstock. And he said, like hell. And I just hung
up and kept going. And I guess that was pretty much
my... That was a particularly awakening
experience for a little Texas bush popper from
Texas out here, because I'd never been out of the
state of Texas across that infamous Mason-Dixon
line at any rate. And now I was up in what my parents
refer to as Yankee territory, God knows. And... It
was a rainy, it was cold to me, and I got very sick
there, but I loved every minute of it. I loved the
fact that people could, the music just seemed to be
able to make people totally lose themselves. For
the first time, I saw the real power of music and how
you could just totally get in to it and just not care
about anything else that was going on around you.
Of course, there were a lot of drugs there. And it
seemed that drugs were not expensive at all.
People were selling heads of acid for a buck or two
bucks. And you could get, oh gosh, you could get an
ounce of marijuana
for, you could get an ounce of marijuana for 30, oh
gosh, less than 30, 20, 15, depending on what. A lot
of times you didn't have to pay for it at all. You
just sat there and somebody would pass you around
the joint and it would go on, but to get back to the
music issue, the music was drug-oriented in a lot
of ways. Lucy in the Sky of Diamonds, of course,
being the big LSD song of the time, and Janis
Joplin, and me and Bobby McGee, and gosh, the
Yellow Submarine, the whole idea that music was a
fantastic voyage into the imagination, and Music
was the prompt, I suppose, and we used it every
chance we got. It was another way of rebelling
against figures of authority because they really
saw this music as detrimental. And it was
anti-American to a large extent. It was peace
movement songs, anti-war songs, pro-choice,
pro-drug, free love. Of course, that's all
parents needed to hear to be turned off by it.
Did you partake in drug use? Mm-hmm, certainly.
Which drugs did you use, and what were your reasons
for using them? I smoked a lot of marijuana. That
was primarily the only drug I did. What were my
reasons? Well,
it was a way of... At the time, to turn down a joint
that was passed to you in a demonstration would be
like saying, no, I don't believe in this. I don't
believe in any of this. Marijuana was like the
common bond. It was like... I don't know, to
compare it to two soldiers in a foxhole sharing a
cigarette. It was another way of saying, I'm in
this movement. My identification is with the
peace movement, the civil rights movement, and
with drugs. I believe everybody has a right to
determine if they want to smoke it or not. It was
another way of saying... hell no to the
government. You're not going to impose this limit
on me. You have no right to tell me this is illegal.
Acid, I really didn't get into. I tried it once or
twice in college and didn't like being that out of
it. Marijuana seemed to focus things in for me, and
acid seemed to totally remove me from them. And I
didn't want to be totally removed. I wanted to have
things I wanted, marijuana seemed to let me get
really deep into my thoughts, and acid seemed to
put me on another, or LSD seemed to put me in another
area of thought, into a hallucinogenic world that
I didn't really enjoy. I didn't want to leave this
world, I just wanted to kind of make it mellower,
because life at that time was not mellow. unless
you were high, because otherwise you were so
worried and so concerned about who you knew might
be called to the Vietnam War next. Your black
friends were always on your case. Either the Black
Panther movement, which was anti-righting no
matter what you tried to do or work with, and they
really felt that all whites were their enemies, or
your friends in the civil rights movement, black
friends, were involving you and making you put
your butt on the line with them somewhere.
I remember once with a group of blacks, we all went
skinny dipping and it was done at a time that the
media had been notified that we would be there at
Hamilton's pool outside of Austin skinny dipping
and it was done so that they would be called in and
and just show a lot of white girls and black guys
frolicking around having a good time totally nude
and of course you know that sort of picture that
gets released or I think it was in the campus
newspaper It just sent shivers down the backs of
parents who envisioned all these mulatto babies.
But marijuana just helped make it seem just a
little bit more mellow for a moment rather than so
tense all the time.
Did you regard yourself as a hippie? Hippie was a
word used by the press and by the parents. No, I
didn't regard myself as a hippie. A hippie was a
flip word. It was like beatnik. It was a word that
stupid TV shows got a hold of and tried to stick on
us. Hippie was so flippant. It was like trying to
ridicule or make fun of what we were all about, I
felt. To say hippie, it made it sound like you were
just some long-haired freak who stayed stoned
most of the time and had no political or social
conscience, which is, I think, what shows like
Laugh-In and people like Goldie Hawn sort of
reduced the movement to, at least on the public
television channels or the public airwaves. It
would be like... Asking someone...
I guess it would be like asking a fundamentalist
Baptist if he considered himself a holy roller. He
would probably take offense at that term. It's
just one of those cutesy little titles that gets
stuck on someone. But as far as a hippie, my family
certainly regarded me as a hippie. They regarded
all of my friends as hippies. But... Hippie was not
a popular term with the movement itself. It was one
of those media terms that gets stuck on people.
What did you call yourself? Did you have a word to
describe? No, not really. We just considered
ourselves involved with the peace movement.
My father would call us peaceniks sometimes.
And that seemed closer than hippie to me.
I just regarded myself as a free thinker and
somebody who was not going to accept all the
garbage that the government was trying to force
down my throat. I didn't want to get caught up in
that. But I guess if I really look back on it, I guess
more than anything, we were anarchists. We were
people who wanted to bring about an overthrow of
the government. We were people who wanted to bring
about an overthrow of the system. And by system, I
mean the family system, the way most people
regarded the education system. We wanted
everything to be run on a whole different basis
that involved no censorship. Everybody could
just, quote unquote, do their own thing.
How do you feel about the statement that you, along
with other SDS members, were communist
sympathizers?
I can live with that. To me, calling someone a
communist is not an insult.
That does not make you a bad person to me. I'm not
sure what they meant by communist sympathizers.
I'm not even sure that most people who use the word
communist have any idea of the word as far as a
communist, a pure theoretical look at the
communist belief that it's a society that works
for the mutual benefits of other people. If they
want to call me a communist sympathizer, that's
fine with me. I think the word was erroneously used
to mean a sympathizer or to have some sort of
Russian ties. And I didn't know much about Russia
at the time. Communal living was a big thing at the
time. I knew several people who did live in
communes. I had friends in Tennessee that lived on
a commune that still works today called The Farm.
I
had lots of friends out in California and Oregon
who lived on communes. And the fact that if someone
thought To say that I was a communist sympathizer,
I knew no more about the communist government and
what was going on over there. And what I did know, it
seemed to me that it was somewhat of a repressive
government. So I would have never supported that.
I think they threw that term out because the worst
thing you could be at the time was somebody who
supported Russian or communism. I mean, the Red
Scare and Joseph McCarthy were still very much
alive in a lot of people's minds. And... To say that
you were a communist sympathizer meant that you
were just totally opposed to a democratic way of
life. And that got the conservative side all in an
uproar because now they could look at anybody with
long hair or faded jeans or people who spoke out
against the war. They didn't listen to what those
people had to say. because the conservative
element, the political element, had branded us as
communist sympathizers. So they no longer heard
the words. They just thought of us as communist,
which was an automatic turn off. It was a clever way
of branding us. It would effectively make
anything we had to say not worth listening to if the
people that we were trying to get to thought we were
communists. It would be like if I told you this
person was a child molester. I mean, are you really
going to listen to them tell you how to bring up your
children?
What interesting public figures did you meet
during your years in the SDS? What type of people? I
guess I met some famous people, enough to shake
hands with them on the podium and be introduced to
them, like Abby Hoffman and Jerry Rubin. I did meet
Lawrence Forland Getty when he was in Texas.
I heard Timothy Leary speak, but I'd never
actually met him. I heard...
Oh... various people associated with the Black
Panther Movement and Malcolm X and the Civil
Rights Movement, you know. But I met Jane Fonda on
one occasion,
who my father just thought that was horrible, that
I would even shake her hand. But those people
didn't impress me nearly as much as my college
professors at the time. One in particular, my
psychology professor, Devendra Singh, who I
think had a big influence on just how I felt. I mean,
immediately he was so anti-Vietnam War. And he
introduced me to such a different way of looking at
the world. And he was an Indian. And of course, that
didn't sit well with my parents either. But we had a
relationship for the year. And I greatly
respected him and his views. And my English
professor, I was in an experimental English class
that year. And boy, was it Peter Botsworth. He was
another real popular speaker at the time on the
University of Texas campus. These people would
invite you into their homes, and you really felt a
great deal of care and concern from these people.
They were much more important to me than any of the
big names.
What was your parents' reaction to your behavior
in college or your involvement with the STFs?
Well, it was not a good time.
My father literally came up to the University of
Texas one night. He got into Austin about 10
o'clock on a day that they had filmed us in various
activities on this particular day we had been
protesting the cutting down of trees along barton
creek and we'd actually chained ourselves to
trees and the bulldozers had come and wouldn't
chop down the trees and the police with the bull
horns and everything but my father had seen it on
the six o'clock news and he immediately jumped in
his car and announced to my mother that he was not
going to support a goddamn commie You know, he'd be
up there in Austin, and he came, and unfortunately
he came, and my psychology professor Devendra and
I were, we were actually just sitting in the living
room at the time, but I think we were in various
stages of undress. And my father, who was a little
man, I mean, he was maybe 5'8", 5'9", and Devendra
was tall. He was 6'1". My father literally threw
him up against the wall and then pushed him down the
stairs, yelling and screaming the whole time.
Well,
being Miss Peace Love that I was, I wasn't going to
call the police, but I did tell my father to leave
and ordered him off, and he threatened to cut me off
financially, and I told him that was fine with me.
Knowing full well he probably wouldn't do it.
Things were very strained at this time. My family
did not know... of how much I was involved in SDS.
And if they had known that I was actually
perpetrating any of the vandalism or the
disrupting of services on the campus,
they would have had...
Well, I did so many things that I thought they would
disown me for, but... I think more than anything,
the fact that I dated people that were not of the
same race
and religion, and or religion, had them floored.
They just lived in fear that I would take off with
somebody God knows who.
It was very strange. It was very difficult. They
were very, very unhappy. Totally unsupportive of
any views I
had. They couldn't support them. And even a
financial cutoff wasn't a big threat because
everything was so anti-materialistic at the
time.
Student loans were easily available.
You could live very cheaply in Austin, and you
could live with friends, and I never had to do that,
but I had a number of people stay with me for weeks at
a time, and that was just considered cool then,
even though sometimes you would get a little
hacked, but whoever was staying with you wasn't
exactly picking up after him or herself. You would
never say too much about it. You would probably
just get high and try to forget it.